It is a disease that can affect anyone in a monumental, colossal way. It is a disease that
many people devote their lives to, either battling through it or striving for a cure. It is a disease
that can be curable, but many unfortunate souls lose their lives battling it. It is cancer.
Cancer had made a home in my father’s tonsil in the summer of 2011. Initially, we all
thought this protruding lump on the side of his neck was just a swollen gland. It began to grow
larger throughout the summer, and it started to cause pain. Daddy, being the stubborn man he
is, would not go to the doctor. In March, he finally went to the doctor for a check-up. They
gave him antibiotics. He was on the medicine for a few months. However, it failed to help. He
was then referred to an ear, nose and throat doctor, who did a needle biopsy and an X-ray that
proved negative for cancer. This doctor thought it was a congenital cyst. Numerous tests were
run, and we were told the life-changing news. “I’m sorry to inform you. You have tonsil
cancer.”
Tonsils are two oval-shaped pads in the back of the mouth that are part of the body’s
germ-fighting immune system. Tonsil cancer often causes difficulty swallowing and a sensation that something is caught in one’s throat. The doctor’s first step of action was to remove the affected tonsil. This procedure is called tonsillectomy. Undergoing such a procedure at the age of forty-nine was extremely difficult. During the surgery, Daddy’s throat collapsed. The doctors had taken the affected tonsil out, but there was still one tonsil in his
throat that needed to be removed. After his throat collapsed, the doctors medically paralyzed
Daddy to get the muscles to relax in order to intubate him. However, they would not take the
risk of getting the one tonsil he had left.
The next step of action was chemotherapy and radiation. During the treatments, I
witnessed my father lose hair, weight, muscle mass, strength, and himself. For three months,
Daddy was “chair-ridden.” He could not lay back in a bed because there was too much
pressure on his throat; therefore he had to sit up in his recliner. He lived in that chair, besides
the trips to and from the doctors. Because of the intensity of the chemo and radiation
treatments, Daddy could not eat through his throat. He had to get a feeding tube put in his
stomach. That made the food go directly into the stomach. The only thing that could go in this
feeding tube was a liquid substance. My mom, my sister, and I all took turns putting the
substance in his feeding tube eight times a day. However, during the times when we were at
school or work, Daddy had to do it. He would say he did fill his feeding tube, but he did not,
which made him lose one hundred pounds.
After they put the feeding tube in his stomach, they put a power port in his chest. He
received his chemotherapy treatments through this port. Within the same doctor visit, two life-
impacting procedures had occurred. Throughout the treatments, Daddy was in extreme pain.
The pain was caused by the cancer itself, but mostly from the radiation; the raw skin that was
around his neck burned. Because of the pain, Daddy took several amounts of pain medication, mostly Oxycontin and Morphine. Due to the pain and the medication, Daddy would be blacked out for days. The only way to try to escape the pain was to sleep.
Cancer had a chain around my family for one long year. One long year of agony.
Cancer not only pierced my dad’s life, but affected me as well. I learned at a young age that
life is not filled with rainbows and butterflies, but rather pain and suffering. Witnessing such a
devastating event for such a long period of time can make one insane. I wanted to get away
from it all. I did not want to see the strong, fearless man that I looked up to, to become so
weak. However, I had nowhere to go. Like the young girl in Annie Dillard’s autobiographical
story, “The Chase,” as she was running for her life, she felt like there was nowhere to go:
“Mikey and I had nowhere to go, in our own neighborhood or out of it.” The angry man kept
chasing her. It did not matter where she went, he would always be behind her, gaining on her.
Cancer was the angry man chasing me, gaining on me. It did not matter where I went, it would
always be with me. For one long year, it was always with me.